www.all-about-psychology.com

Presents Superstition in the Pigeon
By B. F. Skinner (1948) First Published in Journal of Experimental Psychology, 3
8, 168-172

To say that a reinforcement is contingent upon a response may mean nothing more
than that it follows the response. It may follow because of some mechanical con
nection or because of the mediation of another organism; but conditioning takes
place presumably because of the temporal relation only, expressed in terms of th
e order and proximity of response and reinforcement. Whenever we present a state
of affairs which is known to be reinforcing at a given drive, we must suppose t
hat conditioning takes place, even though we have paid no attention to the behav
ior of the organism in making the presentation. A simple experiment demonstrates
this to be the case. A pigeon is brought to a stable state of hunger by reducin
g it to 75 percent of its weight when well fed. It is put into an experimental c
age for a few minutes each day. A food hopper attached to the cage may be swung
into place so that the pigeon can eat from it. A solenoid and a timing relay hol
d the hopper in place for five sec. at each reinforcement. If a clock is now arr
anged to present the food hopper at regular intervals with no reference whatsoev
er to the bird's behavior, operant conditioning usually takes place. In six out
of eight cases the resulting responses were so clearly defined that two observer
s could agree perfectly in counting instances. One bird was conditioned to turn
counter-clockwise about the cage, making two or three turns between reinforcemen
ts. Another repeatedly thrust its head into one of the upper corners of the cage
. A third developed a 'tossing' response, as if placing its head beneath an invi
sible bar and lifting it repeatedly. Two birds developed a pendulum motion of th
e head and body, in which the head was extended forward and swung from right to
left with a sharp

1

movement followed by a somewhat slower return. The body generally followed the
movement and a few steps might be taken when it was extensive. Another bird was
conditioned to make incomplete pecking or brushing movements directed toward but
not touching the floor. None of these responses appeared in any noticeable stre
ngth during adaptation to the cage or until the food hopper was periodically pre
sented. In the remaining two cases, conditioned responses were not clearly marke
d. The conditioning process is usually obvious. The bird happens to be executing
some response as the hopper appears; as a result it tends to repeat this respon
se. If the interval before the next presentation is not so great that extinction
takes place, a second 'contingency' is probable. This strengthens the response
still further and subsequent reinforcement becomes more probable. It is true tha
t some responses go unreinforced and some reinforcements appear when the respons
e has not just been made, but the net result is the development of a considerabl
e state of strength. With the exception of the counter-clockwise turn, each resp
onse was almost always repeated in the same part of the cage, and it generally i
nvolved an orientation toward some feature of the cage. The effect of the reinfo
rcement was to condition the bird to respond to some aspect of the environment r
ather than merely to execute a series of movements. All responses came to be rep
eated rapidly between reinforcements -- typically five or six times in 15 sec. T
he effect appears to depend upon the rate of reinforcement. In general, we shoul
d expect that the shorter the intervening interval, the

2

speedier and more marked the conditioning. One reason is that the pigeon's beha
vior becomes more diverse as time passes after reinforcement. A hundred photogra
phs, each taken two sec. after withdrawal of the hopper, would show fairly unifo
rm behavior. The bird would be in the same part of the cage, near the hopper, an
d probably oriented toward the wall where the hopper has disappeared or turning
to one side or the other. A hundred photographs taken after 10 sec., on the othe
r hand, would find the bird in various parts of the cage responding to many diff
erent aspects of the environment. The sooner a second reinforcement appears, the
refore, the more likely it is that the second reinforced response will be simila
r to the first, and also that they will both have one of a few standard forms. I
n the limiting case of a very brief interval the behavior to be expected would b
e holding the head toward the opening through which the magazine has disappeared
. Another reason for the greater effectiveness of short intervals is that the lo
nger the interval, the greater the number of intervening responses emitted witho
ut reinforcement. The resulting extinction cancels the effect of an occasional r
einforcement. According to this interpretation the effective interval will depen
d upon the rate of conditioning and the rate of extinction, and will therefore v
ary with the drive and also presumably between species. Fifteen sec. is a very e
ffective interval at the drive level indicated above. One min. is much less so.
When a response has once been set up, however, the interval can be lengthened. I
n one case it was extended to two min., and a high rate of responding was mainta
ined with no sign of

3

weakening. In another case, many hours of responding were observed with an inte
rval of one min. between reinforcements. In the latter case, the response showed
a noticeable drift in topography. It began as a sharp movement of the head from
the middle position to the left. This movement became more energetic, and event
ually the whole body of the bird turned in the same direction, and a step or two
would be taken. After many hours, the stepping response became the predominant
feature. The bird made a well defined hopping step from the right to the left fo
ot, meanwhile turning its head and body to the left as before. When the stepping
response became strong, it was possible to obtain a mechanical record by puttin
g the bird on a large tambour directly connected with a small tambour which made
a delicate electric contact each time stepping took place. By watching the bird
and listening to the sound of the recorder it was possible to confirm the fact
that a fairly authentic record was being made. It was possible for the bird to h
ear the recorder at each step, but this was, of course, in no way correlated wit
h feeding. The record obtained when the magazine was presented once every min. r
esembles in every respect the characteristic curve for the pigeon under periodic
reinforcement of a standard selected response. A well marked temporal discrimin
ation develops. The bird does not respond immediately after eating, but when 10
or 15 or even 20 sec. have elapsed it begins to respond rapidly and continues un
til the reinforcement is received.

4

Fig. 1. 'Reconditioning' of a superstitious response after extinction. The resp
onse of hopping from right to left had been thoroughly extinguished just before
the record was taken. The arrows indicate the automatic presentation of food at
one-min. intervals without reference to the pigeon's behavior.

In this case it was possible to record the 'extinction' of the response when the
clock was turned off and the magazine was no longer presented at any time. The
bird continued to respond with its characteristic side to side hop. More than l0
,000 responses were recorded before 'extinction' had reached the point at which
few if any responses were made during a 10 or 15 min interval. When the clock wa
s again started, the periodic presentation of the magazine (still without any co
nnection whatsoever with the bird's behavior) brought out a typical curve for re
conditioning after periodic reinforcement, shown in Fig. 1. The record had been
essentially horizontal for 20 min. prior to the beginning of this curve. The fir
st reinforcement had some slight effect and the second a greater effect. There i
s a smooth positive acceleration in rate as the bird returns to the rate of resp
onding which prevailed when it was reinforced every min.

5

When

the

response

was

again

extinguished

and

the

periodic

presentation of food then resumed, a different response was picked up. This cons
isted of a progressive walking response in which the bird moved about the cage.
The response of hopping from side to side never reappeared and could not, of cou
rse, be obtained deliberately without making the reinforcement contingent upon t
he behavior. The experiment might be said to demonstrate a sort of superstition.
The bird behaves as if there were a causal relation between its behavior and th
e presentation of food, although such a relation is lacking. There are many anal
ogies in human behavior. Rituals for changing one's luck at cards are good examp
les. A few accidental connections between a ritual and favorable consequences su
ffice to set up and maintain the behavior in spite of many unreinforced instance
s. The bowler who has released a ball down the alley but continues to behave as
if he were controlling it by twisting and turning his arm and shoulder is anothe
r case in point. These behaviors have, of course, no real effect upon one's luck
or upon a ball half way down an alley, just as in the present case the food wou
ld appear as often if the pigeon did nothing -- or, more strictly speaking, did
something else. It is perhaps not quite correct to say that conditioned behavior
has been set up without any previously determined contingency whatsoever. We ha
ve appealed to a uniform sequence of responses in the behavior of the pigeon to
obtain an over-all net contingency. When we arrange a clock to present food ever
y 15 sec., we are in effect basing our reinforcement upon a limited set of respo
nses which frequently occur 15 sec. after reinforcement. When a response has bee
n strengthened (and this may result from one reinforcement), the

6

setting of the clock implies an even more restricted contingency. Something of
the same sort is true of the bowler. It is not quite correct to say that there i
s no connection between his twisting and turning and the course taken by the bal
l at the far end of the alley. The connection was established before the ball le
ft the bowler's hand, but since both the path of the ball and the behavior of th
e bowler are determined, some relation survives. The subsequent behavior of the
bowler may have no effect upon the ball, but the behavior of the ball has an eff
ect upon the bowler. The contingency, though not perfect, is enough to maintain
the behavior in strength. The particular form of the behavior adopted by the bow
ler is due to induction from responses in which there is actual contact with the
ball. It is clearly a movement appropriate to changing the ball's direction. Bu
t this does not invalidate the comparison, since we are not concerned with what
response is selected but with why it persists in strength. In rituals for changi
ng luck the inductive strengthening of a particular form of behavior is generall
y absent. The behavior of the pigeon in this experiment is of the latter sort, a
s the variety of responses obtained from different pigeons indicates. Whether th
ere is any unconditioned behavior in the pigeon appropriate to a given effect up
on the environment is under investigation. The results throws some light on inci
dental behavior observed in experiments in which a discriminative stimulus is fr
equently presented. Such a stimulus has reinforcing value and can set up superst
itious behavior. A pigeon will often develop some response such as turning, twis
ting, pecking near the locus of the discriminative stimulus, flapping its wings,
etc. In much of the work to date in this field the interval between presentatio
ns of the discriminative stimulus has been one

7

min. and many of these superstitious responses are short-lived. Their appearanc
e as the result of accidental correlations with the presentation of the stimulus
is unmistakable. THE END

8

For more free psychology eBooks please visit: http://www.all-about-psychology.c
om/psychology-ebook.html

Keep up-to-date with all the latest updates on the All About Psychology Website.
http://twitter.com/psych101 Interested In Forensic Psychology?

What is forensic psychology?, criminal profiling, the study and practice of fore
nsic psychology. These are just some of the many topics on offer at this free an
d comprehensive website. www.all-about-forensic-psychology.com Interested In For
ensic Science?

Forensic Science definitions, history, topic areas, theory and practice, careers
, debates, CSI, degree and study options are all covered in detail here. www.all
-about-forensic-science.com

9


